\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ns-3-testing.info
@settitle ns-3 testing and validation
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
Documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
Doxygen, several documents, and the wiki:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen/Manual}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/tutorial/index.html,,ns-3 Tutorial}
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doc//index.html,,ns-3 Tutorial}
@item ns-3 Testing and Validation (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize

This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML versions
should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.
@end ifinfo

@copying

This is an @command{ns-3} reference manual.
Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
Doxygen, several documents, and the wiki:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/tutorial/index.html,,ns-3 Tutorial}
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/manual/index.html,,ns-3 Manual}
@item ns-3 Testing and Validation (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize
 
This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML 
versions should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.

This software is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see @uref{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title ns-3 Testing and Validation
@author ns-3 project
@author feedback:  ns-developers@@isi.edu

@b{Simulator version: }
@include VERSION
@today{}

@c @page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@ifnottex
@anchor{Full Table of Contents}
@end ifnottex
@shortcontents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Overview, Full Table of Contents 
@top ns-3 Testing and Validation (html version)

For a pdf version of this document, 
see @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/testing.pdf}.

Simulator version:
@include VERSION

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Background::
* TestingFramework::
* How to write tests::
* Random Variables::
* Propagation Loss Models::
* References::
@end menu

@include overview.texi
@include background.texi
@include testing-framework.texi
@include how-to-write-tests.texi
@include validation.texi
@include random-variables.texi
@include propagation-loss.texi
@include references.texi

@printindex cp

@bye
