@node ns-3 Callbacks
@chapter ns-3 Callbacks

Some new users to @command{ns-3} are unfamiliar with an extensively used 
programming idiom used throughout the code:  the ``ns-3 callback''.  This 
chapter provides some motivation on the callback, guidance on how to use
it, and details on its implementation.

@menu
* Motivation::
* Using the Callback API::
* Callback locations in ns-3::
* Implementation details::
@end menu

@node Motivation
@section Motivation

Consider that you have two simulation models A and B, and you wish
to have them pass information between them during the simulation.  One
way that you can do that is that you can make A and B each explicitly
knowledgable about the other, so that they can invoke methods on each
other. 

@example
class A {
public:
  void ReceiveInput ( // parameters );
  ...
}

(in another source file:)

class B {
public:
  void ReceiveInput ( // parameters);
  void DoSomething (void);
  ...

private:
  A* a_instance; // pointer to an A
}

void
B::DoSomething()
{
  // Tell a_instance that something happened
  a_instance->ReceiveInput ( // parameters);
  ...
}
@end example

This certainly works, but it has the drawback that it introduces a 
dependency on A and B to know about the other at compile time (this
makes it harder to have independent compilation units in the simulator)
and is not generalized; if in a later usage scenario, B needs to talk 
to a completely different C object, the source code for B needs to be 
changed to add a ``c_instance'' and so forth.  It is easy to see that 
this is a brute force mechanism of communication that can lead to 
programming cruft in the models.  

This is not to say that objects should not know about one another
if there is a hard dependency between them, but that often the model 
can be made more flexible if its interactions are less constrained at 
compile time.

This is not an abstract problem for network simulation research,
but rather it has been a source of problems in previous simulators,
when researchers want to extend or modify the system to do different
things (as they are apt to do in research).  Consider, for example,
a user who wants to add an IPsec security protocol sublayer
between TCP and IP:  
@verbatim
------------                   -----------
|   TCP    |                   |  TCP    |
------------                   -----------
     |           becomes ->        |
-----------                    -----------
|   IP    |                    | IPsec   |
-----------                    -----------
                                   |
                               -----------
                               |   IP    |
                               -----------
@end verbatim
If the simulator has
made assumptions, and hard coded into the code, that IP always talks 
to a transport protocol above, the user may be forced to hack the 
system to get the desired interconnections.  

An alternative that provides this flexibility is to use a level of 
indirection that is commonly known in programming as a callback.  
A callback function is not invoked explicitly by the caller but is 
rather delegated to another function that receives the callback 
function's address and can call it.

You may be familiar with function pointers in C or C++; these can
be used to implement callbacks.  For more information on introductory
callbacks, an online reference is:  
@uref{http://www.inquiry.com/techtips/cpp_pro/10min/10min0300.asp,,Declaring Function Pointers and Implementing Callbacks} and
@uref{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Callback_(computer_science),,Callback (computer science)-- Wikipedia}.

The callback API in @command{ns-3} is designed to minimize the overall
coupling between various pieces of of the simulator
by making each module depend on the callback API
itself rather than depend on other modules. It acts as a sort of
third-party to which work is delegated and which forwards this
work to the proper target module. This callback API, being based
on C++ templates,
is type-safe; that is, it performs static type checks to enforce
proper signature compatibility between callers and callees.  It
is therefore more type-safe to use than traditional function
pointers, but the syntax may look imposing at first.  This section
is designed to walk you through the callback system so that you
can be comfortable using it in @command{ns-3}.

@node Using the Callback API
@section Using the Callback API

The Callback API is fairly minimal, providing only two services:
@itemize @bullet
@item callback type declaration: a way to declare a type of callback
with a given signature, and,
@item callback instantiation: a way to instantiate a
template-generated forwarding callback which can forward any calls
to another C++ class member method or C++ function.
@end itemize

This is best observed via walking through an example, based on
@code{samples/main-callback.cc}.

@node Using the Callback API with static functions
@subsection Using the Callback API with static functions

Consider a function:
@example
static double
CbOne (double a, double b)
{
  std::cout << "invoke cbOne a=" << a << ", b=" << b << std::endl;
  return a;
}
@end example

Consider also the following main program snippett:
@example
int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  // return type: double
  // first arg type: double
  // second arg type: double
  Callback<double, double, double> one;
}
@end example

This class template Callback implements what is known as the Functor 
Design Pattern. It is used to declare the type of a callback.  It contains
one mandatory argument (the return type of the function to be assigned
to this callback) and up to five optional arguments, which each specify
the type of the arguments (if your function has more than five arguments,
then this can be handled by extending the callback implementation).   

So in the above, we have a declared a callback named "one" that will
eventually hold a function pointer.  The function that it will hold
must return double and must support two double arguments.  If one
tries to pass a function whose signature does not match the declared
callback, the compilation will fail.

Now, we need to tie together this callback instance and the actual
target function (CbOne).  Notice above that CbOne has the same function
signature types as the callback-- this is important.  We can
pass in any such properly-typed function to this callback.  Let's 
look at this more closely:
@verbatim
static double CbOne (double a, double b) {}
          ^           ^          ^
          |        ---|    ------|
          |        |       | 
Callback<double, double, double> one;
@end verbatim
You can only bind a function to a callback if they have the matching
signature.  The first template argument is the return type, and the
additional template arguments are the types of the arguments of
the function signature.

Now, let's bind our callback "one" to the function that matches its
signature:
@example
  // build callback instance which points to cbOne function
  one = MakeCallback (&CbOne);
@end example

Then, later in the program, if the callback is to be used, it can be
used as follows:
@example
// this is not a null callback
  NS_ASSERT (!one.IsNull ());
  // invoke cbOne function through callback instance
  double retOne;
  retOne = one (10.0, 20.0);
@end example

The check @code{IsNull()} ensures that the callback is not null; that there 
is a function to call behind this callback.  Then, @code{one()} returns the
same result as if @code{CbOne()} had been called directly.


@node Using the Callback API with member functions
@subsection Using the Callback API with member functions

Generally, you will not be calling static functions but instead
public member functions of an object.  In this case, an extra 
argument is needed to the MakeCallback function, to tell the system
on which object the function should be invoked.  Consider this example,
also from main-callback.cc:

@example
class MyCb {
public:
  int CbTwo (double a) {
      std::cout << "invoke cbTwo a=" << a << std::endl;
      return -5;
  }
};

int main ()
{
  ...
  // return type: int
  // first arg type: double
  Callback<int, double> two;
  MyCb cb;
  // build callback instance which points to MyCb::cbTwo
  two = MakeCallback (&MyCb::CbTwo, &cb);
  ...
}
@end example

Here, we pass a (raw) pointer to the @code{MakeCallback<>} function,
that says, when @code{two ()} is invoked, to call the @code{CbTwo} function
on the object pointed to by @code{&cb}.   

A variation of this is used when objects are referred to by ns-3 smart
pointers.  The MakeCallback API takes a raw pointer, so we need to
call @code{PeekPointer ()} to obtain this raw pointer.  So the example
above would look like:

@example
class MyCb : public Object {
public:
  int CbTwo (double a) {
      std::cout << "invoke cbTwo a=" << a << std::endl;
      return -5;
  }
};

int main ()
{
  ...
  // return type: int
  // first arg type: double
  Callback<int, double> two;
  Ptr<MyCb> cb = CreateObject<MyCb> ();
  // build callback instance which points to MyCb::cbTwo
  two = MakeCallback (&MyCb::CbTwo, PeekPointer (cb));
  ...
}
@end example

@node Building Null Callbacks
@subsection Building Null Callbacks

It is possible for callbacks to be null; hence it may be wise to
check before using them.  There is a special construct for a null
callback, which is preferable to simply passing "0" as an argument;
it is the @code{MakeNullCallback<>} construct:
@example
  two = MakeNullCallback<int, double> ();
  // invoking a null callback is just like
  // invoking a null function pointer:
  // it will crash at runtime.
  //int retTwoNull = two (20.0);
  NS_ASSERT (two.IsNull ());
@end example

@node Callback locations in ns-3
@section Callback locations in @command{ns-3}

Where are callbacks frequently used in @command{ns-3}?  Here are some of the
more visible ones to typical users:

@subsection Socket API
@subsection Layer-2/Layer-3 API
@subsection Tracing subsystem
@subsection Routing
Route Reply

@node Implementation details
@section Implementation details

This section is advanced explanation for C++ experts interested in
the implementation, and may be skipped by most users.

This code was originally written based on the techniques described 
@uref{http://www.codeproject.com/cpp/TTLFunction.asp,,here}.
It was subsequently rewritten to follow the architecture
outlined in 
@uref{http://www.amazon.com/Modern-C\%2B\%2B-Design-Programming-Patterns/dp/0201704315/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1/102-0157303-1900156?ie=UTF8\&s=books\&qid=1187982662\&sr=1-1,,Modern C++ Design: Generic Programming and Design Patterns Applied-- Alexandrescu}, chapter 5, "Generalized Functors".

This code uses:
@itemize @bullet
@item default template parameters to saves users from having to
specify empty parameters when the number of parameters
is smaller than the maximum supported number
@item the pimpl idiom: the Callback class is passed around by
value and delegates the crux of the work to its pimpl pointer.
@item two pimpl implementations which derive from CallbackImpl
FunctorCallbackImpl can be used with any functor-type
while MemPtrCallbackImpl can be used with pointers to
member functions.
@item a reference list implementation to implement the Callback's
value semantics.
@end itemize

This code most notably departs from the Alexandrescu
implementation in that it does not use type lists to specify
and pass around the types of the callback arguments.
Of course, it also does not use copy-destruction semantics
and relies on a reference list rather than autoPtr to hold
the pointer.
