
@c ========================================================================
@c Begin document body here
@c ========================================================================

@c ========================================================================
@c Introduction
@c ========================================================================

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

The @command{ns-3} simulator is a discrete-event network
simulator targeted primarily for research and educational use.  
The @uref{http://www.nsnam.org,,@command{ns-3} project}, started in 
2006, is an open-source project.  The goal of the project is to
build a new netework simulator primarily for research and educational use.  

The purpose of this tutorial is to introduce new @command{ns-3} users to the 
system in a structured way.  It is sometimes difficult for new users to
glean essential information from detailed manuals and to convert this
information into working simulations.  In this tutorial, we will build 
several example simulations, introducing and explaining key concepts and
features as we go.

As the tutorial unfolds, we will introduce the full @command{ns-3} 
documentation 
and provide pointers to source code for those interested in delving deeper
into the workings of the system.

Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
three forms:
@itemize @bullet
@item ns-3 Manual:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item Tutorial (this document)
@item ns-3 wiki (http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php)
@end itemize
 
A few key points are worth noting at the onset:
@itemize @bullet
@item @command{ns-3} is not an extension of @command{ns-2}; it is a new
simulator.  The two simulators are both written in C++ but @command{ns-3}
is a new simulator that does not support the @command{ns-2} APIs.
Some models from @command{ns-2} have already been ported from @command{ns-2}
to @command{ns-3}. The project will continue to maintain @command{ns-2} while
@command{ns-3} is being built, and will study transition and
integration mechanisms.
@item @command{ns-3} is open-source, and the project strives to maintain
an open environment for researchers to contribute and share their
software.  
@end itemize
 
The goal of this tutorial is to introduce new users of @command{ns-3} to enough
of the system to enable them to author simple simulation scripts and extract
useful information from the simulations.  We begin by introducing some of the
other important resources that are available to those interested in using or
writing scripts, models and even those interested in making contributions to
the core @command{ns-3} system.  We provide an overview of some of the 
important abstractions, design patterns and idioms used when writing 
@command{ns-3} scripts, and then dig right in by begining to write simulation 
scripts, run them and interpret results.

After completing this tutorial, one should be able to:
@itemize @bullet
@item Find documentation resources in the distribution and on the web;
@item Download and compile the @command{ns-3} system;
@item Use the provided devices to author network simulations of fairly  
significant complexity;
@item Use the default value system to configure simulations;
@item Write new @command{ns-3} applications;
@item Use the tracing subsystem.
@end itemize

@c ========================================================================
@c Overview
@c ========================================================================

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

This chapter is a brief tour of @command{ns-3}.  It introduces the
concept of discrete event simulation, provides a brief overview of
@command{ns-3}, and provides a short contextual introduction for
the existing @command{ns-2} user community.

@node Discrete Event Simulation
@section Discrete Event Simulation  

@node ns-3 Overview
@section ns-3 Overview

@node For ns-2 users
@section For @command{ns-2} users

For those familiar with @command{ns-2}, the most visible outward change 
when moving to @command{ns-3} is the choice of scripting language.  
@command{ns-2} is typically scripted in Tcl and results of simulations are
often visualized using the Network Animator @command{nam}.  In 
@command{ns-3} there is currently no visualization module, and multiple 
language bindings are allowed.  In this tutorial, we will concentrate on 
scripting directly in C++ and interpreting results via trace files.  Scripting
in other languages will typically be done via straightforward bindings of the 
target language into the underlying C++.

@c ========================================================================
@c Resources
@c ========================================================================

@node Resources
@chapter Resources

@menu
* The-Web::
* Mercurial::
* Waf::
* Environment-Idioms-Design-Patterns::
* Socket-Programming::
@end menu

@node The-Web
@section The Web

@cindex www.nsnam.org
There are several important resources of which any @command{ns-3} user must be
aware.  The main web site is located at @uref{http://www.nsnam.org}
and provides access to basic information about the @command{ns-3} system.  
Detailed documentation is available through the main web site at
@uref{http://www.nsnam.org/documents.html}.

@cindex documentation
@cindex architecture
You can find documents relating to the system architecture from this page,
and also gain access to the detailed software documentation.  The software
system is documented in great detail using 
@uref{http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/,,Doxygen}.  There is a Wiki that
complements the main @command{ns-3} web site which you will find at 
@uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/}.

You will find user and developer FAQs there as well as troubleshooting guides, 
third-party contributed code, papers, etc. The source code may be found 
and browsed at @uref{http://code.nsnam.org/}. 

@cindex repository!ns-3-dev
@cindex repository!releases
There you will find the current development tree in the repository named
@code{ns-3-dev}. Past releases and experimental repositories of the core
developers may also be found there.

@node Mercurial
@section Mercurial

Complex software systems need some way to manage the organization and 
changes to the underlying code and documentation.  There are many ways to
perform this feat, and you may have heard of some of the systems that are
currently used to do this.  The Concurrent Version System (CVS) is probably
the most well known.

@cindex software configuration management
@cindex Mercurial
The @command{ns-3} project uses Mercurial as its source code management system.
Although you do not need to know much about Mercurial in order to complete
this tutorial, we recommend becoming familiar with Mercurial and using it 
to access the source code.  Mercurial has a web site at 
@uref{http://www.selenic.com/mercurial/},
from which you can get binary or source releases of this Software
Configuration Management (SCM) system.  Selenic (the developer of Mercurial)
also provides a tutorial at 
@uref{http://www.selenic.com/mercurial/wiki/index.cgi/Tutorial/},
and a QuickStart guide at
@uref{http://www.selenic.com/mercurial/wiki/index.cgi/QuickStart/}.

You can also find vital information about using Mercurial and @command{ns-3}
on the main @command{ns-3} web site.

@node Waf
@section Waf

@cindex Waf
@cindex make
@cindex build
Once you have source code downloaded to your local system, you will need 
to compile that source to produce usable programs.  Just as in the case of
source code management, there are many tools available to perform this 
function.  Probably the most famous of these tools is @code{make}.  Along
with being the most famous, @code{make} is probably the most difficult to
use in a very large and highly configurable system.  Because of this, many
alternatives have been developed.  Recently these systems have been developed
using the Python language.

The build system @code{Waf} is used on the @command{ns-3} project.  It is one 
of the new generation of Python-based build systems.  You will not need to 
understand any Python to build the existing @command{ns-3} system, and will 
only have to understand a tiny and intuitively obvious subset of Python in 
order to extend the system in most cases.

For those interested in the gory details of Waf, the main web site can be 
found at @uref{http://freehackers.org/\~tnagy/waf.html}.

@node Environment-Idioms-Design-Patterns
@section Environment, Idioms, and Design Patterns

@cindex C++
As mentioned above, scripting in @command{ns-3} is done in C++.  A working 
knowledge of C++ and object-oriented concepts is assumed in this document.
We will take some time to review some of the more advanced concepts or 
possibly unfamiliar language features, idioms and design patterns as they 
appear.  We don't want this tutorial to devolve into a C++ tutorial, though,
so we do expect a basic command of the language.  There are an almost 
unimaginable number of sources of information on C++ available on the web or
in print.

If you are new to C++, you may want to find a tutorial- or cookbook-based
book or web site and work through at least the basic features of the language
before proceeding.

@subsection Environment

@cindex toolchain
@cindex GNU
The @command{ns-3} system uses the GNU ``toolchain'' for development.  
A software toolchain is the set of programming tools available in the given 
environment. For a quick review of what is included in the GNU toolchain see,
@uref{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_toolchain}.

@cindex Linux
Typically a @command{ns-3} author will work in Linux or a Linux-like
environment.  For those running under Windows, there do exist environments 
which simulate the Linux environment to various degrees.  The @command{ns-3} 
project supports development in the Cygwin and the MinGW environments for 
these users.  See @uref{http://www.cygwin.com/} and 
@uref{http://www.mingw.org/} for details on downloading and using these
systems.  I use Cygwin in these cases since it provides all of the Linux tools
I know and love.  It can, however, sometimes be problematic due to the way it 
actually does its emulation, and sometimes interactions with other Windows
software can cause problems.

@cindex Cygwin
@cindex MinGW
If you do use Cygwin or MinGW; and use Logitech products, I will save you
quite a bit of heartburn right off the bat and encourage you to take a look
at the @uref{http://www.mingw.org/MinGWiki/index.php/FAQ,,MinGW FAQ}.

@cindex Logitech
Search for ``Logitech'' and read the FAQ entry, ``why does make often 
crash creating a sh.exe.stackdump file when I try to compile my source code.''
Believe it or not, the @code{Logitech Process Monitor} insinuates itself into
every DLL in the system when it is running.  It can cause your Cygwin or
MinGW DLLs to die in mysterious ways and often prevents debuggers from 
running.  Beware of Logitech.

@subsection Idioms and Design Patterns

@cindex idiom
In any system, there are a number of problems to be solved that happen 
repeatedly.  Often the solutions to these problems can be generalized and
applied in a similar way across the system.  These solutions are called
Design Patterns.  The @command{ns-3} system relies on several classic design
patterns.

@cindex design pattern
Also, in any language, there are constructs that, while they aren't part of the
language per se, are commonly found and useful.  For example, at the lowest 
level a C programmer should be able to immediately recognize the purpose and 
intent  of the following code without having to reflect on the details:

@verbatim
  for (;;)
@end verbatim

These low-level constructs, or idioms, extend upward in complexity, eventually
becoming implementations of design patterns.  As you are exposed to more 
and more of the @command{ns-3} system, you will begin to recognize and be 
comfortable with the C++ implementations (idioms) of several important design
patterns.

@cindex functor
@cindex callback
@cindex smart pointer
The @command{ns-3} code relies heavily on 
@emph{Generalized Functors, Callbacks, 
Smart Pointers, Singletons, and Object Factories}.  Although we will 
not assume any detailed knowledge of the idioms and design patterns used 
in the @command{ns-3}
system, it will be useful for readers who intend to delve deeply into the
system to understand some important related concepts.  We recommend two 
resources: @uref{http://www.amazon.com/Design-Patterns-Object-Oriented-Addison-Wesley-Professional/dp/0201633612/,,Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software, Gamma et. al.} and
@uref{http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0201704315,,Modern C++ Design: Generic Programming and Design Patterns Applied, Alexandrescu}.

Gamma addresses the abstract design patterns, and Alexandrescu addresses the
C++ idioms you will often see throughout the @command{ns-3} code.

@cindex template
Almost any use of @command{ns-3} will require some basic knowledge of C++ 
templates.
We will discuss the high-level uses in this tutorial.  However, if you venture
deeply into the source code, you will see fairly heavy use of relatively
sophisticated C++ templates in some of low-level modules of the system.  The
You don't have to be a template guru to complete this tutorial but if you
expect to work in @command{ns-3} at a low level you will have to be 
somewhat fluent
with templates.  If you  want to truly grok C++ templates we recommend,
@uref{http://www.amazon.com/Templates-Complete-Guide-David-Vandevoorde/dp/0201734842/,,C++ Templates: The Complete Guide, Vandevoorde and Josuttis}.

@node Socket-Programming
@section Socket Programming

@cindex sockets
We will assume a basic facility with the Berkeley Sockets API in the examples
used in this tutorial.  If you are new to sockets, we recommend reviewing the
API and some common usage cases.  For a good overview of programming TCP/IP
sockets we recommend @uref{http://www.elsevier.com/wps/product/cws_home/680765,,Practical TCP/IP Sockets in C, Donahoo and Calvert}.

There is an associated web site that includes source for the examples in the
book, which you can find at:
@uref{http://cs.baylor.edu/~donahoo/practical/CSockets/}.

If you understand the first four chapters of the book (or for those who do
not have access to a copy of the book, the echo clients and servers shown in 
the website above) you will be in good shape to understand the tutorial.
There is a similar book on Multicast Sockets,
@uref{http://www.elsevier.com/wps/product/cws_home/700736,,Multicast Sockets, Makofske and Almeroth}.
that covers material you may need to understand for the multicast examples.

@c ========================================================================
@c The Basics
@c ========================================================================

@node The-Basics
@chapter The Basics

@cindex Linux
@cindex Cygwin
@cindex GNU
@cindex toolchain
From this point forward, we are going to assume that the reader is working in
Linux or a Linux emulation environment (Linux, Cygwin, etc.) and has the GNU
toolchain installed and verified.  

@cindex Mercurial
@cindex Waf
We are going to assume that you have Mercurial and Waf installed and running
on the target system as described in the Getting Started section of the 
@command{ns-3} web site: @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/getting_started.html}.

@section Downloading
@cindex tarball
The @command{ns-3} code is available in Mercurial repositories on the server
code.nsnam.org.  You can download a tarball, but we recommend working with
Mercurial --- it will make your life easier in the long run.

@cindex repository
If you go to the following link: @uref{http://code.nsnam.org/},
you will see a number of repositories.  Many are the private repositories of
the @command{ns-3} development team.  The repositories of interest to you 
will be
prefixed with ``ns-3''.  The current development snapshot (unreleased) of
@command{ns-3} may be found at: @uref{http://code.nsnam.org/ns-3-dev/}.

The developers attempt to keep this repository in a consistent, working state
but it is a development area with unreleased code present, so you may want to
consider downloading an official release.

There will be a number of released repositories present at code.nsnam.org.
These repos will have names like ns-3.0.1 --- which referes to release 3.0.1 
of the network simulator (or if you like, release 0.1 of @command{ns-3}).  
Since the releases are changing at a rate of one per month, I will stick with 
the more constant ns-3-dev here, but you can replace the string ns-3-dev with
your choice of release (e.g., ns-3.0.5) below.  You can find the latest 
version  of the code either by inspection of the repository list or by going 
to the ``Getting Started'' web page and looking for the latest release 
identifier.

I typically create a directory called @code{repos} in my home directory under
which I keep all of my local Mercurial repositories.  @emph{Hint:  I will
assume you do this later in the tutorial.} If you adopt that approach, you 
can get a copy of the development version of @command{ns-3} by typing 
the following into your Linux shell (I use bash).

@verbatim
  cd
  mkdir repos
  cd !$
  hg clone http://code.nanam.org/ns-3-dev
@end verbatim

As the hg command executes, you should see something like the following,

@verbatim
  destination directory: ns-3-dev
  requesting all changes
  adding changesets
  adding manifests
  adding file changes
  added 1513 changesets with 5687 changes to 733 files
  358 files updated, 0 files merged, 0 files removed, 0 files unresolved
@end verbatim

After the clone command completes, you should have a directory called 
ns-3-dev under your @code{~/repos} directory, the contents of which should 
look something like the following:

@verbatim
  AUTHORS  RELEASE_NOTES  examples/  src/       waf*
  LICENSE  VERSION        ns3/       tutorial/  waf.bat*
  README   doc/           samples/   utils/     wscript
@end verbatim

You are now ready to build the @command{ns-3} distribution.

@section Building
@cindex Waf!build
@cindex Waf!configure
@cindex Waf!debug
@cindex Waf!compile
We use Waf to build the @command{ns-3} project.  The first thing you 
will need to do is to configure the build.  For reasons that will become clear
later, we are going to work with debug builds in the tutorial.  To explain to 
Waf that it should do debug builds you will need to execute the following 
command,

@verbatim
  ./waf -d debug configure
@end verbatim

This runs the copy of Waf in the local directory (which is provided as a 
convenience for you).  As the build system checks for various dependencies
you should see output that looks similar to the following,

@verbatim
  ~/repos/ns-3-dev >./waf -d debug configure
  Checking for program g++                : ok /usr/bin/g++
  Checking for program cpp                : ok /usr/bin/cpp
  Checking for program ar                 : ok /usr/bin/ar
  Checking for program ranlib             : ok /usr/bin/ranlib
  Checking for compiler could create programs : ok
  Checking for compiler could create shared libs : ok
  Checking for compiler could create static libs : ok
  Checking for flags -Wall                       : ok
  Checking for flags -O2                         : ok
  Checking for flags -g -DDEBUG                  : ok
  Checking for flags -g3 -O0 -DDEBUG             : ok
  Checking for g++                               : ok
  Checking for header stdlib.h                   : ok
  Checking for header stdlib.h                   : ok
  Checking for header signal.h                   : ok
  Checking for high precision time implementation: 128-bit integer
  Checking for header stdint.h                   : ok
  Checking for header inttypes.h                 : ok
  Checking for header sys/inttypes.h             : not found
  Configuration finished successfully; project is now ready to build.
  ~/repos/ns-3-dev >
@end verbatim

The build system is now configured and you can build the debug versions of 
the @command{ns-3} programs by simply typing,

@verbatim
  ./waf
@end verbatim

You will see many Waf status messages displayed as the system compiles.  The
most important is the last one,

@verbatim
  Compilation finished successfully
@end verbatim

@section Running a Script
@cindex Waf!run
We typically run scripts under the control of Waf.  This allows the build 
system to ensure that the shared library paths are set correctly and that
the libraries are available at run time.  To run a program, simply use the
@code{run} option in Waf.  Let's run the @command{ns-3} equivalent of the hello
world program by typing the following:

@verbatim
  ./waf --run hello-simulator
@end verbatim

Waf first checks to make sure that the program is built correctly and 
executes a build if required.  Waf then then executes the program, which 
produces the following output.

@verbatim
  Hello Simulator
@end verbatim

@emph{Congratulations.  You are now an @command{ns-3} user.}

@c ========================================================================
@c Some Prerequisites
@c ========================================================================

@node Some-Prerequisites
@chapter Some Prerequisites

The first thing we need to do before actually starting to code is to explain
a few core concepts, abstractions and idioms in the system.  Much of this may
appear transparently obvious to some, but we recommend taking the time to read
through this chapter just to ensure you are starting on a firm foundation.

@section Abstractions

In this section, we'll review some terms that are commonly used in
networking, but have a specific meaning in @command{ns-3}.

@subsection Node
@cindex Node
In Internet jargon, a computing device that connects to a network is called
a @emph{host} or sometimes an @emph{end system}.  Because @command{ns-3} is a 
@emph{network} simulator, not specifically an @emph{Internet} simulator, we 
intentionally do not use the term host since it is closely associated with
the Internet and its protocols.  Instead, we use a more generic term also
used by other simulators that originates in Graph Theory --- the @emph{node}.

@cindex Node!class
In @command{ns-3} the basic computing device abstraction is called the 
node.  This abstraction is represented in C++ by the class @code{Node}.  The 
@code{Node} class provides methods for managing the representations of 
computing devices in simulations.  Developers are expected to specialize the 
@code{Node} in the object-oriented programming sense to create new computing
device models.  In this tutorial, we will use a specialization of class 
@code{Node} called @code{InternetNode}.  As you might expect, the
@code{InternetNode} is a class that represents a host in the Internet sense,
and automatically provides core IPv4 networking protocols.

You should think of a @code{Node} as a computer to which you will add 
functionality.  One adds things like applications, protocol stacks and
peripheral cards with their associated drivers to enable the computer to do
useful work.  We use the same basic model in @command{ns-3}.

@subsection Application
@cindex Application
Typically, computer software is divided into two broad classes.  @emph{System
Software} organizes various computer resources such as memory, processor
cycles, disk, network, etc., according to some computing model.  System
software usually does not use those resources to complete tasks that directly
benefit a user.  A user would typically run an @emph{application} that acquires
and uses the resources controlled by the system software to accomplish some
goal.  

@cindex system call
Often, the line of separation between system and application software is made
at the privilege level change that happens in operating system traps.
In @command{ns-3} there is no real concept of operating system and especially
no concept of privilege levels or system calls.  We do, however, have the
idea of an application.  Just as software applications run on computers to
perform tasks in the ``real world,'' @command{ns-3} applications run on
@command{ns-3} @code{Node}s to drive simulations in the simulated world.

@cindex Application!class
In @command{ns-3} the basic abstraction for a user program that generates some
activity to be simulated is the application.  This abstraction is represented 
in C++ by the class @code{Application}.  The @code{Application} class provides 
methods for managing the representations of our version of user-level 
applications in simulations.  Developers are expected to specialize the
@code{Application} in the object-oriented programming sense to create new
applications.  In this tutorial, we will use specializations of class 
@code{Application} called @code{UdpEchoClient} and @code{UdpEchoServer}.
As you might expect, these applications compose a client/server application set
used to generate and echo simulated network packets 

@subsection Channel
@cindex Channel

In the real world, one can connect a computer to a network.  Often the media
over which data flows in these netowrks are called @emph{channels}.  When
you connect your Ethernet cable to the plug in the wall, you are connecting 
your computer to an Ethernet communication channel.  In the simulated world
of @command{ns-3} one connects a @code{Node} to an object representing a
communication channel.  Here the basic communication subnetwork abstraction 
is called the channel and is represented in C++ by the class @code{Channel}.  

The @code{Channel} class provides methods for managing communication 
subnetwork objects and connecting nodes to them.  They may also be specialized
by developers in the object oriented programming sense.  A @code{Channel}
specialization may model something as simple as a wire.  The specialized 
@code{Channel} can also model things as complicated as a large Ethernet
switch, or three-dimensional space in the case of wireless networks.

We will use specialized versions of the @code{Channel} called
@code{CsmaChannel} and @code{PointToPointChannel} in this tutorial.  The
@code{CsmaChannel}, for example, models a version of a communication subnetwork
that implements a @emph{carrier sense multiple access} communication medium.
This gives us Ethernet-like functionality.  

@subsection Net Device
@cindex NetDevice
@cindex Ethernet

It used to be the case that if you wanted to connect a computers to a network,
you had to buy a specific kind of network cable and a hardware device called
(in PC terminology) a @emph{peripheral card} that needed to be installed in
your computer.  These cards were called Network Interface Cards, or 
@emph{NIC}s.  Today most computers come with the network controller hardware
built in and users don't see these building blocks.

A NIC will not work without a software driver to control the hardware.  In 
Unix (or Linux), a piece of peripheral hardware is classified as a 
@emph{device}.  Devices are controlled using @emph{device drivers}, and network
devices (NICs) are controlled using @emph{network device drivers}
collectively known as @emph{net devices}.  In Unix and Linux you refer
to these net devices by names such as @emph{eth0}.

In @command{ns-3} the @emph{net device} abstraction covers both the software 
driver and the simulated hardware.  A net device is ``attached'' to a 
@code{Node} in order to enable the @code{Node} to communicate with other 
@code{Node}s in the simulation via @code{Channel}s.  Just as in a real
computer, a @code{Node} may be connected to more than one @code{Channel} via
multiple @code{NetDevice}s.

The net device abstraction is represented in C++ by the class @code{NetDevice}.
The @code{NetDevice} class provides methods for managing connections to 
@code{Node} and @code{Channel} objects; and may be specialized by developers
in the object-oriented programming sense.  We will use the specialized version
of the @code{NetDevice} called the @code{CsmaNetDevice} in this tutorial.
Just as an Ethernet NIC is designed to work with an Ethernet network, the
@code{CsmaNetDevice} is designed to work with a @code{CsmaChannel}.

@subsection Topology Helpers
In a real network, you will find host computers with added (or built-in)
NICs.  In @command{ns-3} we would say that you will find @code{Nodes} with 
attached @code{NetDevices}.  In a large simulated network you will need to 
arrange many connections between @code{Node}s, @code{NetDevice}s and 
@code{Channel}s.

Since connecting a @code{NetDevice} to a @code{Node}, and a @code{NetDevice}
to a @code{Channel} is such a common task in @command{ns-3} we provide what we
call @emph{topology helpers} to make this as easy as possible.  Topology 
helpers perform much of the dirty work of creating and connecting net devices.
For example, it may take several distinct method calls to create a NetDevice,
add a MAC address, connect the net device to a @code{Node} and configure
the protocol stack, and then connect the @code{NetDevice} to a @code{Channel}.
We use topology helper functions to compose those distinct operations into
an easy to use model.

Topology helper functions use the abstractions (described above) of Network
Interface Cards and Cables.  When you think of adding a new kind of network,
you may think of going out to the local computer retailer and buying a kit.
This kit might include a nework cable and some number of peripheral cards and
thier associated software drivers.  You can think of topology helpers in 
roughly the same way.  Instead of buying a kit for a given type of network,
you will use a topology helper class for a given type of network, to accomplish
the equivalent of installing the network ``kit.''

@section Important Idioms
Now that we have identified that there are C++ classes in the system called
@code{Node} and @code{InternetNode}, we need to understand how to bring
objects of these classes into existance, and manage their lifetimes.  Let's
examine this in some detail here.

@cindex InternetNode
@cindex Create
@cindex Ptr
In @command{ns-3}, if we want to create an @code{InternetNode} in a 
script, we will 
typically do something like the following example:

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

@cindex smart pointer
To some, it may seem intuitively obvious that we're creating an
@code{InternetNode} object and assigning responsibility for managing the 
object to a smart pointer named @code{p}.  For the rest of us, there may be
a lot in that line that is unfamiliar, so let's look at what this line means 
in some detail.

@subsection Templates 101
@cindex template
If you are familiar with C++ templates, you may skip this section as it is
just a cursory introduction to function and class templates.

Referring back to the example line of code, reproduced below for your 
convenience, the angle brackets you see in the code indicate that we are
using C++ @emph{templates}.  

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

The purpose of templates is to allow a programmer to write one version of code
that is applicable over multiple types.  Some people consider templates to be
an enhancement of the C preprocessor macro functionality.  At some level
this comparison reveal some similarities, but C++ templates are really 
quite different.

@cindex template!declaration
@cindex template!definition
@cindex template!use
In C++, just as with most language constructs, templates are @emph{declared}, 
@emph{defined} and @emph{used}.  A declaration of a template might look
something like,

@verbatim
  template <typename T> T Add (T first, T second);
@end verbatim

@cindex template!typename
This line uses the keyword @code{template} followed by a declaration of a
type name (in this case @code{T}) in angle brackets.  The angle brackets 
should indicate to you that a template is being declared, defined or used.
The type name @code{T} can be thought of as a string that will be substitited
during the use phase of the template.  For example, the @code{T} may be
replaced by the word @code{int}.  It is this substitution that leads people
to compare templates with macros.

Without going into too much more detail, this snippet declares that a piece
of code exists that will be able to call a function @code{Add} that will
add arbitrary types together.  The @code{T} will be eventually replaced by
a C++ data type name.  For example,

@verbatim
  T Add (T first, T second);
@end verbatim

might eventually become

@verbatim
  int Add (int first, int second);
@end verbatim

If the template has been declared, we need to @emph{define} what that piece of
code will actually do.  That might look something like,

@verbatim
  template <typename T> 
  T Add (T first, T second)
  {
    return first + second;
  }
@end verbatim

All we've done here is to provide an implementation of the template that 
adds the two variables together and returns the result.  Note that this
implementation works for any type that provides an @code{operator+}.

The puzzle all comes together when you understand that @emph{using} a template
causes the compiler to automatically instantiate code for a specific function 
according to the given template parameters.  You might use the above template
like,

@verbatim
  int x, y, z;
  z = Add<int> (x, y);
@end verbatim

@cindex template!instantiate
When the compiler sees @code{Add<int>} it understands that it needs to make
sure that code is instantiated (created) to perform the @code{Add} using the
specified type @code{<int>}.  To a first approximation, the compiler will 
replace the typename @code{T} with the specified type @code{int} and 
automagically generate code equivalent to,

@verbatim
  int Add (int first, int second)
  {
    return first + second;
  }
@end verbatim

A user of the template definition could just as easily have provided a use
that assigned the type float.  This would simply be done like,

@verbatim
  float x, y, z;
  z = Add<float> (x, y);
@end verbatim

In this case, the compiler would automatically generate code that looked like,

@verbatim
  float Add (float first, float second)
  {
    return first + second;
  }
@end verbatim

@cindex template!function
This particular kind of template programming uses what are called
@emph{function templates}.  They are called function templates since you 
are @emph{templating} function declarations and definitions.

@cindex template!class
Templates can also be used in conjunction with classes, in which case you are
said to be using, not too surprisingly, @emph{class templates}.  The syntax and
use is similar.  To declare a class template you might use something like,

@verbatim
  template <typename T> 
  class MyStack
  {
    void Push (T data);
    T Pop (void);
  };
@end verbatim

The methods can be defined separately in a method similar to function template
definitions,

@verbatim
  template <typename T> void MyStack<T>::Push (T data)
  {
    ...
  };
@end verbatim

You can then use the new templated class in the following way, 

@verbatim
  int x, y;

  MyStack<int> stack;
  stack.Push (x);
  y = stack.Pop ();
@end verbatim

Similarly to the function template case, the compiler knows that it has to
automatically generate code to fill out the class and method declarations
and definitions using the appropriate type specified by @code{<int>}.

@subsection Smart Pointers 101
If you are familiar with C++ smart pointers, you may skip this section as it
is just a cursory introduction to smart pointers and intrusive reference
counting.

@cindex smart pointer
Referring back to the example line of code, partially reproduced below for 
your convenience below, the left hand side is the declaration and
initialization of a class template that implements a @emph{smart pointer}.

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = ...
@end verbatim

To a first approximation, you can think of @code{Ptr<Node>} as the a new kind
of declaration of a pointer to a @code{Node} object.  The difference is that
a smart pointer is a user-defined data type (instantiated via a templated
class) that @emph{simulates} a classical pointer but provides additional 
features.  As an aside, you typically pronounce  @code{Ptr<Node>} as 
``pooter node'' where pooter rhymes with footer.

@cindex memory management
One of the most important ``additional feature'' provided by smart pointers is
automatic memory management.  Since you now understand class templates, you
will understand how the template allows us to write the pointer code once, but
allows us to point to many different kinds of objects.  Later in the tutorial
you will see variations such as @code{Ptr<Ipv4>} and @code{Ptr<Channel>}, 
which are smart pointers to an IP version 4 object and a channel object, 
respectively.

The use of built-in pointers in C and C++ is a major source of bugs.  Constant
allocation of, passing of responsibility for, and deallocation of underlying
data makes it very likely that errors will occur.  In one of these errors,
the usual problem is that the responsibility for deallocating a memory block
is misplaced.  This may result in a memory leak or a duplicate deallocation.
Smart pointers try to prevent this kind of problem by working with the
@emph{scope} and @emph{extent} rules of the language to make memory 
deallocation automatic.

The scope of a variable defines where in a program a given variable may be 
referred to.  The extent of a variable defines when in the program's execution
the variable has a valid value.  Consider a simple subroutine that contains a
smart pointer.

@verbatim
  void SimpleSubroutine (void)
  {
    Ptr<Node> p;
  }
@end verbatim

@cindex scope
The variable named @code{p} has a scope limited to the subroutine itself.  The 
variable is said to @emph{come into scope} as the subroutine is entered during
execution.  At this time, the constructor of the underlying class is executed
and a valid variable is available for use.  When the subroutine is done 
executing, the variable is said to @emph{go out of scope}.  This causes the
destructor of the underlying class to be executed and the variable no longer
has a valid value.  This is not a problem since it is no longer valid to refer
to the parameter.  Smart pointers take advantage of these defined actions at
points where variables must be valid and become discardable to determine when
underlying data can be freed.

@cindex reference counting!intrusive
The @command{ns-3} smart pointer mechanism uses a mechanism called intrusive 
reference counting to determine when a memory block should be automatically 
deallocated.  The term ``intrusive'' means that a reference count (a count of
variables required to have valid data) is stored in the object being managed
instead of in a proxy object.  This means that each piece of memory managed by
a @command{ns-3} smart pointer includes a reference count.  When a smart 
pointer to a reference counted object is created, this reference count is 
incremented.  This indicates that a new variable requires a valid data object 
be present.  When a smart pointer to a reference counted object is destroyed
(for example, when going out of scope) the reference count of the managed 
object is decremented.  When the reference count goes to zero it means that 
all smart pointers to the underlying object have gone out of scope and the 
object is no longer needed by any past ``users'' of the object.  This in turn
means that the object can be safely deallocated, and this is done 
automatically for you as the ``last'' smart pointer goes out of scope.

Consider how this might work as you pass a smart pointer to an object down
a protocol stack.  At each level of the stack, you pass the smart pointer
by value.  This causes a copy of the smart pointer to be made, which 
increments the reference count of the underlying object.  When the
@emph{calling} method is done executing, the calling smart pointer goes out of 
scope and  the reference count is decremented.  This leaves the single smart 
pointer in the @emph{called} method with a reference to the underlying object.
When the smart pointer in the called method goes out of scope, the destructor
for the smart pointer is called.  The destructor checks the reference count
of the underlying object and sees that it becomes zero.  This indicates that 
the object can be deallocated, and the destructor does so.  This results in
the lifetime management of the underlying object being automatically managed,
a boon if you have experience with ``manual'' memory management and finding
memory leaks.

Now, we want to make this feature available as widely as possible to objects
in the @command{ns-3} system.  The basic operations of the smart pointer class
are the same across any intrusively reference counted object.  C++ provides a
mechanism to achieve this kind of generic behavior --- the template.  Let's
examine the declaration of the smart pointer in more detail.  First consider
the way you might declare and use a built-in pointer.  For the sake of
simplicity, just assume that a C++ object of the class @code{MyClass} exists.
Further assume that @code{MyClass} provides one method called @code{method}.
Using built-in pointers, you could do something like the following:

@verbatim
  MyClass *p = ...
  p->method ();
@end verbatim

@cindex smart pointer
One of the key design points of smart pointers is that they should simulate
built-in pointers.  In C++ this is done by overloading @code{operator->}, 
@code{operator=} and @code{operator*}.  To implement a smart pointer we need
to provide a generic class that implements these operators.  This generic 
class should allow operations that appear as if it were a built-in pointer
to the reference counted object. Typically this is accomplished via a
relatively simple C++ class template.  If you are interested in the details
of how this may be accomplished, see Alexandrescu for a good treatment,

@cindex template
Taking the template as given, in order to declare a smart pointer you will
need to create a smart pointer object and provide the template parameter
needed to instantiate the required code.  This parameter will be the name
of the reference counted class to which you want to point.  The smart
pointer class overrides @code{operator=} which allows initialization of the
smart pointer just as if it were a built-in pointer.  The end result is that
you use smart pointers just as if they were built-in pointers:

@verbatim
  SmartPointer<MyClass> p = ...
  p->method ();
@end verbatim

@subsection Object Creation
@cindex Create
On the right hand side of the line of code we're examining (reproduced below
for convenience) is the creation of an @code{InternetNode} object.

@verbatim
  ... = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

@cindex template!function
This turns out to be an instance of use of a C++ @emph{function template}. The
definition of the @code{Create<typename T>()} template calls the new operator
to create an object of the type T.  It then creates a new smart pointer of
the appropriate type (i.e., @code{Ptr<T>}).  This new smart pointer is
assigned initial responsibility for the new object which has its reference
count set to one.

Since the underlying creation mechanism is via the @code{new} operator, and
you can pass parameters to the constructor for an object, we provide several
templates that you can use for passing parameters to the object constructors.
If the constructor for the object requires a parameter, you simply pass that
parameter to the @code{Create} function like this,

@verbatim
  int parm = 1;
  ... = Create<MyClass> (parm);
@end verbatim

We provide Create templates with up to seven parameters, so you could 
conceivably use the @code{Create} template in situations such as,

@verbatim
  int parm = 1;
  ... = Create<MyClass> (p1, p2, p3, p4, p5, p6, p7);
@end verbatim

@subsection Type Safety
Lets take one final look at the now infamous example line of code that we
have been examining for some time (again reproduced below).

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

@cindex smart pointer
@cindex Node
@cindex Create
You may have noticed that the smart pointer on the left hand side of the
assignment is associated with the type @code{Node} and the @code{Create}
template on the right hand side creates an @code{InternetNode} object and
returns a @code{Ptr<InternetNode>} smart pointer.  For this assignment of a
@code{Ptr<InternetNode>} to a @code{Ptr<Node>} to work, there must be some
kind of type conversion going on.

@cindex implicit conversion
Many programmers use @code{implicit conversions} without even realizing it
since they are sometimes so intuitive.  For example, in the following code,

@verbatim
  int i = 1;
  double d = 2.;
  if (n == d) ...
@end verbatim

@cindex standard conversion
the integer (1) is implicitly converted to a double (1.) before the comparison
takes place.  This conversion is performed using what is known as a C++ 
@emph{standard conversion}.  There are a number of standard conversions defined
by the C++ standard.  Among them are,

@itemize @bullet
@item Integral Promotions
@item Integral Conversions
@item Floating Conversions
@item Pointer Conversions
@item Reference Conversions
@end itemize

@cindex assignment operator
@cindex Ptr
For the case of interest here, we need to know what happens in the 
assignment operator (@code{operator=}) of our smart pointer @code{Ptr<Node>}.
This operator takes a reference to a @code{Ptr<Node>} and not a reference to
a @code{Ptr<InternetNode>}.  The one situation where this works automatically
in C++ is if the ``destination'' reference is to a visible, unambiguous base
class of the ``source'' reference.  In this case, the underlying pointer is
@emph{cast} from one type to the other automatically.

To summarize: The magic happens in the assignment operator.  Class
@code{InternetNode} inherits from class @code{Node}.  The reference to the
@code{InternetNode} object in question is, in essence, a pointer to an
@code{InternetNode} object.  The @code{InternetNode} class inherits from the
@code{Node} base class in a way that makes @code{Node} visible and unambiguous.
Therefore, there exists a standard conversion from an @code{InternetNode *} 
to a @code{Node *} and by extension from an @code{InternetNode &} to a
@code{Node &}.  This conversion is applied automatically (and invisibly) 
during paramater passing in the assignment operator we are examining.

@cindex base class
This is a rather involved way of saying there's an invisible pointer cast
to a base class happening in the assignment.  That means that

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

or,

@verbatim
  Ptr<Channel> p = Create<CsmaChannel> ();
@end verbatim

will work just fine.  Of course, if you try something @emph{bad} (TM), like:

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<CsmaChannel> ();
@end verbatim

the compiler will quite appropriately complain that there is no conversion
between these completely unrelated objects (CsmaChannel and Node).

@subsection Summary
Going back to our infamous first line of @command{ns-3} code, we said that if 
we want to create an InternetNode in a script, we will typically do something 
like:

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> p = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

@cindex Create
@cindex InternetNode
@cindex smart pointer
Now we know that this is really a simple statement.  We create an
@code{InternetNode} object on the heap (indirecly using operator @code{new}
and passing no parameters to its constructor) and assign responsibility for
managing the new object's lifetime to a smart pointer.  This smart pointer is 
a pointer to a @code{Node} object, so there was a hidden cast from 
@code{InternetNode} to a @code{Node} done via a standard C++ conversion.  

This may have been quite a hurdle to get past that first line of code, but
we have covered quite a few of the important idioms that you'll encounter in
this tutorial.

@c ========================================================================
@c A First ns-3 script
@c ========================================================================

@node A-First-ns-3-Script
@chapter A First ns-3 script
@cindex design pattern
@cindex idiom
Lets build a simple network using the @command{ns-3} design patterns, idioms,
classes and helpers we have just looked at.  If you downloaded the system as
was suggested above, you will have a release of @command{ns-3} in a directory 
called @code{repos} under your home directory.  Change into that directory, 
where you should see a directory structure something like the following.

@verbatim
  AUTHORS  RELEASE_NOTES  examples/  src/       waf*
  LICENSE  VERSION        ns3/       tutorial/  waf.bat*
  README   doc/           samples/   utils/     wscript
@end verbatim

@cindex hello-simulator.cc
Change into the tutorial directory.  You should see a file named 
@code{hello-simulator.cc} located there.  Copy this file into one named
@code{simple.cc}.  If you open this new file in your favorite editor you will
see some copyright information and the following C++ code:

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/log.h"

  NS_LOG_COMPONENT_DEFINE ("HelloSimulator");

  using namespace ns3;

  int 
  main (int argc, char *argv[])
  {
    LogComponentEnable ("HelloSimulator", LOG_LEVEL_INFO);

    NS_LOG_INFO ("Hello Simulator");
  }
@end verbatim

This is the @command{ns-3} version of the ubiquitous hello-world program.  It 
uses the @command{ns-3} Log module to print ``Hello Simulator'' into the
 standard error output stream.

@cindex logging
Log components are named objects that provide for controlling the verbosity of
debugging output in the system.  We'll have a lot more to say about logging
later on, but for now you can just consider the macro @code{NS_LOG_INFO} to be
a kind of fancy printf to the standard error.

@section A Simple Network
@cindex InternetNode
Let's create a simple network of @code{InternetNode} elements.  In order to
actually create an @code{InternetNode}, you will have to include some header
files.  Put the following code after the include statement in @code{simple.cc}.

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/ptr.h"
  #include "ns3/internet-node.h"
@end verbatim

@cindex include files
The @command{ns-3} build system places the core include files it needs into a 
directory called @code{ns-3} and so whenever you need to include one of the
core files you need to explicitly code this.  The file @code{ptr.h} defines
the generic smart pointer that we use.  The file @code{internet-node.h}
defines the class InternetNode which, as described above, represents an IP
version 4-based computing element in the simulator.

So let's create a few new @code{InternetNode}s by adding the following lines
of code after the call to @code{NS_LOG_INFO} in the simple.cc file right 
after the call to @code{NS_LOG_INFO}.

@verbatim
  Ptr<Node> n0 = Create<InternetNode> ();
  Ptr<Node> n1 = Create<InternetNode> ();
  Ptr<Node> n2 = Create<InternetNode> ();
  Ptr<Node> n3 = Create<InternetNode> ();
@end verbatim

As we now understand, this will create four @code{InternetNode} objects on
the heap and create four @code{Ptr<Node>} smart pointer objects on the stack
to manage them.  You should remember that by using the smart pointers you are 
freed from the responsibility to delete the objects you assign to them.

@cindex Channel
@cindex CsmaChannel
The next step is to create a channel over which these nodes can communicate.
Let's use the CsmaChannel and create a local area network that will allow us 
to hook up nodes similarly to an Ethernet.

As usual, we'll need to include the file that provides the appropriate class
declarations:

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/csma-channel.h"
@end verbatim

Next, Add the following line of code (typically done after node creation) to 
create a channel with a five megabit per second data rate and a two 
millisecond speed-of-light delay between all nodes.  The idiom for creating
the channel is similar to that of the node, but the actual @code{Create}
function is hidden from us in the topology code.  Observe that we are 
using a Csma topology helper function to free us from the details regarding
how the Carrier Sense Multiple Access Channel is actually brought into
existence and initialized.

@verbatim
  Ptr<CsmaChannel> lan = 
    CsmaTopology::CreateCsmaChannel (DataRate (5000000), MilliSeconds (2));
@end verbatim

@cindex idiom!unnamed parameter
You may be unfamiliar with the @emph{unnamed parameter} idiom used here.
When added to a list of parameters, the code @code{DataRate (5000000)} 
constructs a DataRate object on the stack using the appropriate  constructor.
The resulting object has no name, and therefore cannot be referenced 
elsewhere, but is passed to the callee method where it has a valid name and
can be used.  This idiom is essentially a shorthand version of the following:

@verbatim
  DataRate rate (5000000);
  Time latency (MilliSeconds (2));
  Ptr<CsmaChannel> lan = CsmaTopology::CreateCsmaChannel (rate, latency);
@end verbatim

@cindex constructor
@cindex constructor!Time
We should pause for a moment and discuss the constructor to the @code{Time}
data type.  There are a number of different constructors for these objects, and
so there are a number of ways that this initialization could have been done.
There is a constructor that takes a string argument, consisting of expressions
using the units @code{s, ms, us, ns, ps} or @code{fs}, so this could have been
written,

@verbatim
  Time latency ("2ms");
@end verbatim

There are also helper functions available that create time units (one of these
was used in the example):

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Seconds (double)}
@item @code{MilliSeconds (uint64_t)}
@item @code{MicroSeconds (uint64_t)}
@item @code{NanoSeconds (uint64_t)}
@item @code{PicoSeconds (uint64_t)}
@item @code{FemtoSeconds (uint64_t)}
@end itemize

C++ will attempt to promote parameters appropriately, but you will typically
see constructions that respect the type corrrectness of the constructor, as
in @code{Seconds (1.)} and @code{MilliSeconds (2)}.  Notice that the code
@code{Seconds (1)} will work just as well as @code{Seconds (1.)} since the 
integer 1 will be automatically promoted to a double 1. in the former code.
The converse will not work --- i.e., you cannot write code that says 
@code{MilliSeconds (2.)} since a @emph{type demotion} would be required that 
could lose information and the compiler will not do such things ``behind your
back.''  Don't be thrown off by this kind of automatic conversion.

@cindex MAC!address
Okay, now we have code to create four nodes and a local area network.  The 
next step is to wire the network together.  We do this by adding net devices 
to the node.  When we add the net device, we also specify the network to which
the net device is connected and provide a MAC address appropriate to the 
device and network types.  Since we're creating an IP version 4 network using 
a Csma channel, you may expect that we'll be using topology helpers 
appropriate to those types --- the CsmaIpv4Topology helper.  As you may expect,
we'll need to include some files to get the appropriate definitions:

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/mac48-address.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-net-device.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-ipv4-topology.h"
@end verbatim

Now, all that is left is to do the ``wiring'':

@verbatim
  uint32_t nd0 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n0, lan, 
    Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:00"));
@end verbatim

[Note the additional unnamed parameter idiom usage here.]

This code calls the topology helper relating to Csma channels and IP version
four nodes.  It asks to install a Csma net device ``into'' node zero
(@code{n0}) connecting the device to the channel named (@code{lan}).  It also 
assigns a MAC address to the net device.  You can add similar lines of code 
connecting the other nodes to the lan (remembering to assign new MAC 
addresses).

@verbatim
  uint32_t nd1 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n1, lan, 
    Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:01"));

  uint32_t nd2 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n2, lan, 
    Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:02"));

  uint32_t nd3 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n3, lan, 
    Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:03"));
@end verbatim

@cindex IP!address
@cindex IP!network mask
@cindex multihome
Finally, we need to add IP addresses to our nodes.  The pointers to the 
nodes are stored in n0, n1, n2 and n3.  We added net devices to each of
the nodes and remembered the net device index numbers as nd0, nd1, nd2 and
nd3.  You can add multiple net devices to each node resulting in a situation
similar to a multi-homed host.  Each time you add a net device, you will get
a new index.  Since the IP address for a multi-homed host is associated with
a net device, we need to provide that index (which we have saved) to the
topology helper.  We provide an IP version four address via the @command{ns-3} 
class @code{Ipv4Address} which takes a dotted decimal string as a constructor 
parameter.  We also provide a network mask using the @command{ns-3} class
@code{Ipv4Mask} which also takes a dotted decimal string.  The code to 
perform the IP address assignment, then, looks like the following:

@verbatim
  CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n0, nd0, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.1"), 
    Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

  CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n1, nd1, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.2"), 
    Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

  CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n2, nd2, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.3"), 
    Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

  CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n3, nd3, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.4"), 
    Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));
@end verbatim

We have now constructed a simulated network.  Your code should now look 
something like the following,

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/log.h"
  #include "ns3/ptr.h"
  #include "ns3/internet-node.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-channel.h"
  #include "ns3/mac48-address.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-net-device.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-ipv4-topology.h"

  NS_LOG_COMPONENT_DEFINE ("HelloSimulator");

  using namespace ns3;

  int 
  main (int argc, char *argv[])
  {
    LogComponentEnable ("HelloSimulator", LOG_LEVEL_INFO);

    NS_LOG_INFO ("Hello Simulator");

    Ptr<Node> n0 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n1 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n2 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n3 = Create<InternetNode> ();

    Ptr<CsmaChannel> lan = 
      CsmaTopology::CreateCsmaChannel (DataRate (5000000), MilliSeconds (2));

    uint32_t nd0 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n0, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:00"));

    uint32_t nd1 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n1, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:01"));

    uint32_t nd2 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n2, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:02"));

    uint32_t nd3 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n3, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:03"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n0, nd0, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.1"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n1, nd1, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.2"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n2, nd2, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.3"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n3, nd3, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.4"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));
  }
@end verbatim

This script won't actually do anything yet.  The next trick will be to 
convince our nodes to try and send some data over the network.

@section Using Applications
@cindex Create
As mentioned above, we use @code{Application}s in @command{ns-3} to generate 
the data used to drive simulations.  An @code{Application} is added to a 
@command{ns-3} node conceptually just as if you would add an application to a 
computer.  When an application is created (using the @code{Create} template) 
we tell the application which @code{Node} it belongs to (and therefore on 
which node it is running) by passing a smart pointer to that @code{Node} in 
the constructor arguments.

@subsection A UDP Echo Client Application
To use an application, we first have to load the header file in which it is
defined.  For the UDP echo client, this would mean adding the line,

@verbatim
#include "ns3/udp-echo-client.h"
@end verbatim

In order to create the UDP echo client application we will need to add the 
following code:

@verbatim
  uint32_t packetSize = 1024;
  uint16_t port = 7;
  uint32_t maxPacketCount = 1;
  Time interPacketInterval = Seconds (1.);

  Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, "10.1.1.2", port, 
    maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, packetSize);
@end verbatim

@cindex packet
The first four lines have broken out the configuration parameters for the 
application as named parameters for clarity.  We are telling the application
to generate 1024 byte packets (@code{packetSize = 1024}); and to send these
packets to port 7 (@code{port = 7;}).  The application is told to send at most
one packet (@code{maxPacketCount = 1;}); and to delay for one second between
packet sends (@code{interpacketInterval = Seconds(1.)}) which is not used since
only one packet is sent.  We will defer addressing the type @code{Time} until
we discuss the simulator engine.  For now just understand the semantics are
to wait for one second.

The code to actually create the @code{UdpEchoClient} application uses the
same creation idiom as we have used previously.  Notice that we have a case
where the @code{Create} template is used to pass parameters to the constructor
of the underlying object.  

@cindex implicit conversion sequence
Notice that a string is passed as the second parameter.  The formal parameter
to the constructor of the @code{UdpEchoClient} object is actually an
@code{Ipv4Address}.  We get away with this since C++ allows what are called
@emph{implicit conversion sequences} to occur between the argument in the
function call and the corresponding parameter in the function declaration.
Basically, C++ will try to figure out a way to convert parameters for you
transparently.

In this case the conversion sequence is based on the constructor for the
Ipv4Address that takes a @code{char const *} as a parameter.  C++ notices 
that @code{"10.1.1.2"} refers to a @code{char const *} and knows that it
needs to get from there to an @code{Ipv4Address}.  The compiler notices that
there is an @code{Ipv4Address} constructor that takes a @code{char const *} 
and so it uses that constructor transparently to arrange for the conversion.  

You therefore have several options for passing this value.  You can use an 
explicit named variable as in the following:

@verbatim
  Ipv4Address addr ("10.1.1.2");
  ...

  Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, addr, port, 
    maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, packetSize);
@end verbatim

@cindex idiom|unnamed parameter
You can use the unnamed parameter idiom that we have previously seen:

@verbatim
  Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, 
    Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.2"), port, maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, 
    packetSize);
@end verbatim

Or you can rely on implicit conversion sequences as we just saw:

@verbatim
  Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, "10.1.1.2", port, 
    maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, packetSize);
@end verbatim

Which approach to take is a matter of style, really, and you will probably
see all three approaches taken in the @command{ns-3} code.  You should be 
comfortable seeing and using all three methods.

@subsection A UDP Echo Server Application
As usual, to use the UDP echo server we need to add a line to define the
application:

@verbatim
#include "ns3/udp-echo-server.h"
@end verbatim

In order to create the UDP echo server application we will need to add the 
following code:

@verbatim
  Ptr<UdpEchoServer> server = Create<UdpEchoServer> (n1, port);
@end verbatim

We only need to tell the application which node to reside on and which port
to listen on for UDP packets.  The code to actually create the
@code{UdpEchoServer} application uses the now quite familiar @command{ns-3} object
creation idiom.

@subsection A UDP Echo Client-Server Simulation
Now we're getting somewhere.  Your code should look something like the
following (let's change the log component name and program banner from
``Hello Simulator''to something more descriptive while we're at it).

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/log.h"
  #include "ns3/ptr.h"
  #include "ns3/internet-node.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-channel.h"
  #include "ns3/mac48-address.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-net-device.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-ipv4-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/udp-echo-client.h"
  #include "ns3/udp-echo-server.h"

  NS_LOG_COMPONENT_DEFINE ("UdpEchoSimulation");

  using namespace ns3;

  int 
  main (int argc, char *argv[])
  {
    LogComponentEnable ("UdpEchoSimulation", LOG_LEVEL_INFO);

    NS_LOG_INFO ("UDP Echo Simulation");

    Ptr<Node> n0 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n1 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n2 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n3 = Create<InternetNode> ();

    Ptr<CsmaChannel> lan = 
      CsmaTopology::CreateCsmaChannel (DataRate (5000000), MilliSeconds (2));

    uint32_t nd0 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n0, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:00"));

    uint32_t nd1 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n1, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:01"));

    uint32_t nd2 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n2, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:02"));

    uint32_t nd3 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n3, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:03"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n0, nd0, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.1"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n1, nd1, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.2"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n2, nd2, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.3"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n3, nd3, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.4"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    uint32_t packetSize = 1024;
    uint16_t port = 7;
    uint32_t maxPacketCount = 1;
    Time interPacketInterval = Seconds (1.);

    Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, "10.1.1.2", port, 
      maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, packetSize);

    Ptr<UdpEchoServer> server = Create<UdpEchoServer> (n1, port);

  }
@end verbatim

@section Using the Simulation Engine
@cindex model
@cindex simulation executive
You could say that the heart of the @command{ns-3} system is the 
@emph{simulation engine} (sometimes called the simulation executive in other 
systems).

In a computer simulation, a computer @emph{model} of a real world @emph{system}
is constructed.  This is typically done to minimize cost since you do not have
to actually buy, install and maintain physical hardware.  In the case of
@command{ns-3}, a model is a representation of a networking component that is
designed to imitate some number of important behaviors or characteristics of 
an actual component in a real network.  A system is a collection of models
arranged for the purpose of analyzing some behavior.

@section Models
@cindex CsmaNetDevice
@cindex CsmaChannel
@cindex InternetNode
@cindex NIC
@cindex CSMA
We have already encountered several @command{ns-3} models without specifically 
calling them so.  The @code{InternetNode}, @code{CsmaNetDevice} and 
@code{CsmaChannel} objects are models of an Internet computing node, a CSMA
network interface card (NIC), and a network cable able to move data to and
from other CSMA NICs.

@cindex model
@cindex CSMA/CD
It is important to note that the @code{Csma} net devices and the @code{Csma}
channel do not correspond to any real world hardware that you can actually go 
out and buy.  These models implement an approximation, or subset, of the 
behaviors that a real CSMA/CD network would have.  In this case, the
@code{CsmaNetDevice} does not simulate collision detection (CD).  It does 
implement carrier sense and performs collision @emph{avoidance} using global 
spatial knowledge available in the channel.  This would be impossible in any
channel residing in our universe.  

@cindex Ethernet
No model will fully implement @emph{all} of the behaviors of a piece of
hardware.  It is important to understand what is being modeled by the 
@command{ns-3} components you are using and what is not.  For example, the Csma
components we use in this tutorial model a highly abstract multiple access
network that is topologically equivalent to an Ethernet.  It is not necessarily
true that results found in a simulation using the Csma models will apply to
a real-world Ethernet network.  You must understand what behaviors are 
simulated in each of the models before trusting that any results can be 
associated with real-world systems.

@section Time, Events and Callbacks
@cindex time
@cindex event
In a @emph{discrete event simulator} time is not something that @emph{flows},
nor is it something to be measured --- it is the driving force behind the
progress of the simulation.  Time is progressed forward by the simulation 
engine and anything that happens in the simulation is ultimately caused by
an @emph{event}.  An event is some action in the system that is 
@emph{scheduled} to happen at a certain time by the simulation engine.  Time 
does not flow continuously but steps discretely (in possibly large jumps) 
from one scheduled event to another.

@cindex packet
For example, to start the flow of a packet through the system, one would have
to schedule an event with the simulation engine @emph{before} the simulation
was started.  This is important since the simulation engine only jumps time
forward if there is a next event to process.  The simulation stops if there
are no more events, which is equivalent to a state where there is ``nothing 
more to do.''  Before the simulation starts, one schedules driving events in 
terms of absolute time.  For example, one could schedule an event to start 
the flow of a first packet at, say, ten simulated seconds.  In this case, the 
simulation would start its clock at zero seconds and look for the first event 
in its @emph{event queue}.  It would immediately jump time forward by ten 
seconds and @emph{fire} the scheduled event --- that is, make the event happen.

@cindex functor
@cindex function object
@cindex callback
@cindex Callback
In @command{ns-3} an event is basically a pre-packaged function call called a 
@emph{functor}.  Functors are also known as @emph{function objects}, which is
a more descriptive term --- an object (in the object-oriented programming 
sense) that can be called as if it was a function.  Typically one uses a
functor to implement @emph{deferred execution} of a function or method.  The
most commonly encoutered form of deferred execution is in a @emph{callback}
from an I/O system.  In this case, the goal would be to start an I/O
operation and return immediately, without having to wait for the operation 
to complete.  One asks the I/O subsytem to notify you when an operation is
complete by calling some function you provide.  This provided function is
known as a callback function.  [Imagine calling someone on the telephone and
asking them to do something for you.  You also ask them to @emph{call you back}
when they are done.]  Events in the @command{ns-3} system work conceptually
the same way, except that instead of an I/O completion driving the process,
the arrival of some simulated time drives the process.  The @command{ns-3} 
deferred exectution mechanism is via a class called @code{Callback}.

@cindex Time
@cindex Callback
The internal details of the classes representing @code{Time} and 
@code{Callback} abstractions will be introduced as required.  We won't see
events directly for some time, but you should know that they are happening
``under the sheets'' of the simulations you will be writing.

@section Driving the Simulation
@cindex Application
As mentioned previously, time is the driving force behind the progress of
a @command{ns-3} simulation.  Events are scheduled to happen at certain times
by calling methods of the simulation engine, either directly or indirectly
through, for example, an @code{Application}.

In order to get the simulation engine set up and running in our code, we must
first include the language definitions required to describe time- and
simulator-specific classes:

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/simulator.h"
  #include "ns3/nstime.h"
@end verbatim

@cindex Application
As we have seen, we need to ``seed'' the simulation with at least one event.
In the case of an @code{Application}, a method to do this is provided.  This
method must be implemented by each specialization of the class and we must
call this method in our script before the simulation starts.  We can also
provide an event (indirectly) to stop the output of the application at a
certain time.  This is done by adding the following lines to our script:

@verbatim
  server->Start(Seconds(1.));
  client->Start(Seconds(2.));

  server->Stop (Seconds(10.));
  client->Stop (Seconds(10.));
@end verbatim

@cindex Application
@cindex time
@cindex Time
@cindex socket
@cindex event
In the case of the UdpEchoServer, the call to @code{server->Start ()} gives
the @code{Application} the chance to schedule an event that will perform the
usual @emph{sockets} server sequence of socket creation, binding and
recvfrom (see Donahoo's UDPEchoServer.c).

In the case of the UdpEchoClient, the call to @code{client->Start ()} gives
the @code{Application} the chance to schedule an event that will perform the
usual @emph{sockets} client sequence of socket creation, sendto and recvfrom
(see Donahoo's UDPEchoClient.c).  

@cindex event
Note that the start event for the server is scheduled to happen before the 
start event of the client, just as you would start a server application before
you would attempt to start a client application in the real world.

@cindex socket!sendto
The @command{ns-3} equivalent of the call to @code{sendo} in the client will 
schedule (immediately) the transmission of a UDP packet over the just created
socket.  This will cause the packet to percolate down the protocol stack and
eventually into the channel.  The channel will schedule a reception event in
the net device on the destination node.  This event will eventually percolate
up into the server application.  The server application will create a reply
packet and send it back down its stack and eventually back to the channel.
The channel will schedule a reception event back in the client and this will
cause the reply to be sent back up the protocol stack to the client 
application.  

The calls to @code{Stop ()} for both applications cause the sockets to be
torn down and therefore the sending and receiving of packets will be stopped
irrespective of other application settings (such as max packets and interval
in the client).

Finally, we need to run the simulation and when the simulation run is complete,
clean up any resources allocated during the run.  This is done by the calling 
the following static methods:

@verbatim
  Simulator::Run ();
  Simulator::Destroy ();
@end verbatim

We now have the makings of a complete @command{ns-3} network simulation.  The 
source code for the script should look like the following:

@verbatim
  #include "ns3/log.h"
  #include "ns3/ptr.h"
  #include "ns3/internet-node.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-channel.h"
  #include "ns3/mac48-address.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-net-device.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/csma-ipv4-topology.h"
  #include "ns3/udp-echo-client.h"
  #include "ns3/udp-echo-server.h"
  #include "ns3/simulator.h"
  #include "ns3/nstime.h"

  NS_LOG_COMPONENT_DEFINE ("UdpEchoSimulation");

  using namespace ns3;

  int 
  main (int argc, char *argv[])
  {
    LogComponentEnable ("UdpEchoSimulation", LOG_LEVEL_INFO);

    NS_LOG_INFO ("UDP Echo Simulation");

    Ptr<Node> n0 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n1 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n2 = Create<InternetNode> ();
    Ptr<Node> n3 = Create<InternetNode> ();

    Ptr<CsmaChannel> lan = 
      CsmaTopology::CreateCsmaChannel (DataRate (5000000), MilliSeconds (2));

    uint32_t nd0 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n0, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:00"));

    uint32_t nd1 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n1, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:01"));

    uint32_t nd2 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n2, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:02"));

    uint32_t nd3 = CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4CsmaNetDevice (n3, lan, 
      Mac48Address("08:00:2e:00:00:03"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n0, nd0, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.1"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n1, nd1, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.2"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n2, nd2, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.3"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    CsmaIpv4Topology::AddIpv4Address (n3, nd3, Ipv4Address ("10.1.1.4"), 
      Ipv4Mask ("255.255.255.0"));

    uint32_t packetSize = 1024;
    uint16_t port = 7;
    uint32_t maxPacketCount = 1;
    Time interPacketInterval = Seconds (1.);

    Ptr<UdpEchoClient> client = Create<UdpEchoClient> (n0, "10.1.1.2", port, 
      maxPacketCount, interPacketInterval, packetSize);

    Ptr<UdpEchoServer> server = Create<UdpEchoServer> (n1, port);

    server->Start(Seconds(1.));
    client->Start(Seconds(2.));

    server->Stop (Seconds(10.));
    client->Stop (Seconds(10.));

    Simulator::Run ();
    Simulator::Destroy ();
  }
@end verbatim

@cindex csma-echo.cc
Just to make sure you don't get caught up in debugging typographical errors
we have provided this source code for you (along with a copyright header) in
the @code{tutorial} subdirectory of the @command{ns-3} distribution as 
@code{csma-echo.cc}.  We used this opportunity to do some ``clean up''
of some of our example cases by passing parameters using implicit conversion 
sequences and removing some of the named parameters. [These were used for
pedagogic purposes and were not actually necessary.]

@section Building the Script
@cindex Waf
C++ is a compiled language, so you know it had to happen.  We have to build
the script before we run it.  As mentioned before, we use the Waf build system
which is Python-based.  We have to change gears slightly and switch ourselves
to Python mode in order to proceed.

In each subdirectory of the @command{ns-3} distribution in which there are
source files, you will find two files:  one will be named @code{waf} and one
will be named @code{wscript}.  The former, @code{waf}, is a link that allows
one to start the build process from any subdirectory.  We can ignore that one.
The file we need to deal with is @code{wscript}.

@cindex wscript
Open the file @code{ns-3-dev/tutorial/wscript} in your favorite editor
[remember I'm assuming that you have the distribution saved in a
repository under a directory called @code{repos} in you home directory.]

@cindex Python
You should see the following Python code (after an emacs mode line).

@verbatim
  def build(bld):
    obj = bld.create_ns3_program('hello-simulator')
    obj.source = 'hello-simulator.cc'
@end verbatim

These are the only instructions required to build a simulation (I told you
it wasn't going to be too bad).  The line with the method
@code{bld.create_ns3_program} tells the build system to create an object 
file that is a program (executable) named @code{hello-simulator}.  The
following line, with the method @code{obj.source} tells the build system that 
the source file for the program is the file @code{hello-simulator.cc'} in the
local directory.  The required libraries are linked for you for free.

All that needed to be done in order to build the new simulation using the new
source file was to copy the two lines describing the @code{hello-simulator} 
program and change the names to @code{csma-echo}.  You can see these lines
in the @code{wscript} file,

@verbatim
  def build(bld):
    obj = bld.create_ns3_program('hello-simulator')
    obj.source = 'hello-simulator.cc'

    obj = bld.create_ns3_program('csma-echo')
    obj.source = 'csma-echo.cc'

    ...
@end verbatim

When you built the system above, you actually already built this new 
simulation and a number of other examples.  Since you have already configured
@code{Waf} and built the @code{csma-echo} script, you can run the simulation
in the same way as you ran the @code{hello-simulator} script using the 
@code{waf --run} command:

@verbatim
~/repos/ns-3-dev/tutorial > waf --run csma-echo
Entering directory `~/repos/ns-3-dev/build'
Compilation finished successfully
UDP Echo Simulation
~/repos/ns-3-dev/tutorial >
@end verbatim

Wow!  Wasn't that cool!  I'm sure you can barely contain yourself at this
point.  Okay, well, maybe we should figure out how to get some useful
information out of that simulation.  It did run ... I promise.
