\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ns-3.info
@settitle ns-3 tutorial
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
three forms:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen/Manual}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item Tutorial (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize

This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML versions
should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.
@end ifinfo

@copying

This is an @command{ns-3} tutorial.
Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
three forms:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen/Manual}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item Tutorial (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize
 
This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML 
versions should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.

This software is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see @uref{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title ns-3 Tutorial
@author ns-3 project
@author feedback:  ns-developers@@isi.edu
@today{}

@c @page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@anchor{Full Table of Contents}
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Overview, Full Table of Contents 
@top ns-3 Tutorial (html version)

For a pdf version of this tutorial, 
see @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/tutorial.pdf}.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Tutorial Goals::
Part 1:  Getting Started with ns-3
* Overview::
* Browsing::
* Resources::
* Downloading and Compiling::
* Some-Prerequisites::
* A-First-ns-3-Script::
Part 2-:  Details
* ns-3 Callbacks::
* Simulation Output::
* ns-3 routing overview::
* Other-network-topologies::
* Nonlinear-Thinking::
* Summary::
* Object-Model::
* The-Doxygen-Documentation-System::
* How-To-Change-Things::
* How-To-Set-Default-Values::
* How-To-Write-A-New-Application::
@ Troubleshooting
@end menu

@include introduction.texi
@include callbacks.texi
@include output.texi
@include routing.texi
@include other.texi
@include troubleshoot.texi

@printindex cp

@bye
