\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ns-3.info
@settitle ns-3 manual
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
four forms:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen/Manual}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/tutorial/tutorial.html,,ns-3 Tutorial}
@item Reference Manual (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize

This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML versions
should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.
@end ifinfo

@copying

This is an @command{ns-3} reference manual.
Primary documentation for the @command{ns-3} project is available in
five forms:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/tutorial/tutorial.html,,ns-3 Tutorial}
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,ns-3 Doxygen}:  Documentation of the public APIs of the simulator
@item Reference Manual (this document)
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/tutorials.html,, ns-3 Testing and Validation manual}
@item @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/wiki/index.php,, ns-3 wiki}
@end itemize
 
This document is written in GNU Texinfo and is to be maintained in
revision control on the @command{ns-3} code server.  Both PDF and HTML 
versions should be available on the server.  Changes to 
the document should be discussed on the ns-developers@@isi.edu mailing list.

This software is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see @uref{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title ns-3 Reference Manual
@author ns-3 project
@author feedback:  ns-developers@@isi.edu

@b{Simulator version:  }
@include VERSION
@today{}

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@page
@center This page is intentionally blank.
@end titlepage

@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@ifnottex
@anchor{Full Table of Contents}
@end ifnottex
@shortcontents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ns-3 Manual (html version)

For a pdf version of this manual, 
see @uref{http://www.nsnam.org/docs/manual.pdf}.

Simulator version:  
@include VERSION

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Organization::
* Random variables::
* Callbacks::
* Object model::
* Attributes::
* Object names::
* Logging::
* Tracing::
* RealTime::
* Distributed::
* Packets::
* Helpers::
* Python::
* Node and NetDevices::
* Simple NetDevice::
* PointToPoint NetDevice::
* CSMA NetDevice::
* Wifi NetDevice::
* Mesh NetDevice::
* Bridge NetDevice::
* Wimax NetDevice::
* Emulation::
* Emu NetDevice::
* Tap NetDevice::
* Sockets APIs::
* Internet Stack::
* IPv4::
* IPv6::
* Routing overview::
* TCP::
* Applications::
* Flow Monitor::
* Animation::
* Statistics::
* Creating a new ns-3 model::
* Troubleshooting::
@end menu

@setchapternewpage odd
@headings off
@everyheading @thischapter @| @| ns-3 manual
@everyfooting  ns-3.6 @| @thispage @| @today
@include organization.texi

@unnumbered Part 1:  ns-3 core 
@setchapternewpage off
@include random.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@include callbacks.texi
@include objects.texi
@include attributes.texi
@include names.texi
@include log.texi
@include tracing.texi
@include realtime.texi
@include distributed.texi
@include packets.texi
@include helpers.texi
@include python.texi

@unnumbered Part 2:  Nodes and NetDevices
@setchapternewpage off
@include node.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@include simple.texi
@include point-to-point.texi
@include csma.texi
@include wifi.texi
@include mesh.texi
@include bridge.texi
@include wimax.texi

@unnumbered Part 3:  Emulation
@setchapternewpage off
@include emulation.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@include emu.texi
@include tap.texi

@unnumbered Part 4:  Internet Models
@setchapternewpage off
@include sockets.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@include internet.texi
@include ipv4.texi
@include ipv6.texi
@include routing.texi
@include tcp.texi

@unnumbered Part 5:  Applications
@setchapternewpage off
@include applications.texi
@setchapternewpage odd

@unnumbered Part 6:  Support
@setchapternewpage off
@include flow-monitor.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@include animation.texi
@include statistics.texi
@include new-models.texi
@include troubleshoot.texi

@printindex cp

@bye
