@node Routing overview
@chapter Routing overview

@menu
* Routing-Overview::
* Support for multiple routing protocols::
* Roadmap and Future work::
* Static routing::
* Unicast routing::
* Multicast routing::
* Global centralized routing::
* Global Unicast Routing API::
* Global Routing Implementation::
* Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR)::
@end menu

This chapter describes the overall design of routing in the 
@code{src/internet-stack}
module, and some details about the routing approachs currently
implemented.

@node Routing-Overview
@section Overview

We intend to support traditional routing approaches and protocols,
ports of open source routing implementations, and facilitate research
into unorthodox routing techniques.
For simulations that are not primarily focused on routing and that
simply want correct routing tables to occur somehow, we have an
global centralized routing capability.  A singleton object
(GlobalRouteManager) be instantiated, builds a network map, and
populates a forwarding table on each node at time t=0 in the
simulation.  Simulation script writers can use the same node
API to manually enter routes as well.

@node Support for multiple routing protocols
@section Support for multiple routing protocols

Typically, multiple routing protocols are supported in user space and
coordinate to write a single forwarding table in the kernel.  Presently
in @command{ns-3}, the implementation instead allows for multiple routing 
protocols to build/keep their own routing state, and the IPv4 implementation
will query each one of these routing protocols (in some order determined
by the simulation author) until a route is found.  

We chose this approach because it may better
faciliate the integration of disparate routing approaches that may 
be difficult to coordinate the writing to a single table, approaches
where more information than destination IP address (e.g., source
routing) is used to determine the next hop, and on-demand
routing approaches where packets must be cached.  

There are presently two routing protocols defined:
@itemize @bullet
@item class Ipv4StaticRouting (covering both unicast and multicast)
@item  Optimized Link State Routing (a MANET protocol defined in
@uref{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3626.txt,,RFC 3626})
@end itemize
but first we describe how multiple routing protocols are supported. 

@subsection class Ipv4RoutingProtocol

@code{class Ipv4RoutingProtocol} derives from ns-3 Object which means
that it supports interface aggregation and reference counting.  Routing
protocols should inherit from this class, defined in src/node/ipv4.cc. 

The main function that must be supported by these protocols is called
@code{RequestRoute}.
@verbatim
   * This method is called whenever a node's IPv4 forwarding engine
   * needs to lookup a route for a given packet and IP header.
   *
   * The routing protocol implementation may determine immediately it
   * should not be handling this particular the route request.  For
   * instance, a routing protocol may decline to search for routes for
   * certain classes of addresses, like link-local.  In this case,
   * RequestRoute() should return false and the routeReply callback
   * must not be invoked.
   * 
   * If the routing protocol implementations assumes it can provide
   * the requested route, then it should return true, and the
   * routeReply callback must be invoked, either immediately before
   * returning true (synchronously), or in the future (asynchronous).
   * The routing protocol may use any information available in the IP
   * header and packet as routing key, although most routing protocols
   * use only the destination address (as given by
   * ipHeader.GetDestination ()).  The routing protocol is also
   * allowed to add a new header to the packet, which will appear
   * immediately after the IP header, although most routing do not
   * insert any extra header.
   */
  virtual bool RequestRoute (uint32_t interface,
                             const Ipv4Header &ipHeader,
                             Ptr<Packet> packet,
                             RouteReplyCallback routeReply) = 0;
@end verbatim

This class also provides a typedef (used above) for a special Callback 
that will pass to the callback function the Ipv4Route that is found (see the
Doxygen documentation):
@verbatim
  typedef Callback<void, bool, const Ipv4Route&, Ptr<Packet>, const Ipv4Header&> RouteReplyCallback;
@end verbatim

@subsection Ipv4::AddRoutingProtocol

Class Ipv4 provides a pure virtual function declaration for the
method that allows one to add a routing protocol:
@verbatim
  void AddRoutingProtocol (Ptr<Ipv4RoutingProtocol> routingProtocol,
                           int16_t priority);
@end verbatim
This method is implemented by class Ipv4L3Protocol in the internet-stack
module.

The priority variable above governs the priority in which the routing
protocols are inserted.  Notice that it is a signed int.
When the class Ipv4L3Protocol is instantiated, a single routing
protocol (Ipv4StaticRouting, introduced below) is added at priority
zero.  Internally, a list of Ipv4RoutingProtocols is stored, and
and the routing protocols are each consulted in decreasing order
of priority to see whether a match is found.  Therefore, if you
want your Ipv4RoutingProtocol to have priority lower than the static
routing, insert it with priority less than 0; e.g.:
@verbatim
  m_ipv4->AddRoutingProtocol (m_routingTable, -10);
@end verbatim

@subsection Ipv4L3Protocol::Lookup

The main function for obtaining a route is shown below:  
@verbatim
Ipv4L3Protocol::Lookup (
  uint32_t interface,
  Ipv4Header const &ipHeader,
  Ptr<Packet> packet,
  Ipv4RoutingProtocol::RouteReplyCallback routeReply)
@end verbatim

This function will search the list of routing protocols, in priority order,
until a route is found.  It will then invoke the RouteReplyCallback
and no further routing protocols will be searched.  If the caller does
not want to constrain the possible interface, it can be wildcarded
as such:
@verbatim
  Lookup (Ipv4RoutingProtocol::IF_INDEX_ANY, ipHeader, packet, routeReply);
@end verbatim

@node Roadmap and Future work
@section Roadmap and Future work

Some goals for future support are:

Users should be able to trace (either debug print, or redirect to a trace
file) the routing table in a format such as used in an
Unix implementation:
@verbatim
# netstat -nr (or # route -n)
Kernel IP routing table
Destination   Gateway      Genmask         Flags  MSS Window  irtt Iface
127.0.0.1     *            255.255.255.255 UH       0 0          0 lo
172.16.1.0    *            255.255.255.0   U        0 0          0 eth0
172.16.2.0    172.16.1.1   255.255.255.0   UG       0 0          0 eth0

# ip route show
192.168.99.0/24 dev eth0  scope link 
127.0.0.0/8 dev lo  scope link 
default via 192.168.99.254 dev eth0
@end verbatim

Global computation of multicast routing should be implemented as well.  
This would ignore group membership and ensure that a copy of every 
sourced multicast datagram would be delivered to each node.  
This might be implemented as an RPF mechanism that functioned on-demand 
by querying the forwarding table,
and perhaps optimized by a small multicast forwarding cache.  It is
a bit trickier to implement over wireless links where the input
interface is the same as the output interface; other aspects of the
packet must be considered and the forwarding logic slightly changed
to allow for forwarding out the same interface.

In the future, work on bringing XORP or quagga routing to ns, but it will
take several months to port and enable.

There are presently no roadmap plans for IPv6.

@node Static routing
@section Static routing

The internet-stack module provides one routing protocol (Ipv4StaticRouting)
by default.  This routing protocol allows one to add unicast or multicast
static routes to a node.

@node Unicast routing
@section Unicast routing

The unicast static routing API may be accessed via the functions
@verbatim
void Ipv4::AddHostRouteTo ()
void Ipv4::AddNetworkRouteTo () 
void Ipv4::SetDefaultRoute ()
uint32_t Ipv4::GetNRoutes ()
Ipv4Route Ipv4::GetRoute ()
@end verbatim

@uref{http://www.nsnam.org/doxygen/index.html,,Doxygen} documentation
provides full documentation of these methods.  These methods are forwarding
functions to the actual implementation in Ipv4StaticRouting, when using
the internet-stack module.

@node Multicast routing
@section Multicast routing

The following function is used to add a static multicast route
to a node:
@verbatim
void 
Ipv4StaticRouting::AddMulticastRoute (Ipv4Address origin,
                          Ipv4Address group,
                          uint32_t inputInterface,
                          std::vector<uint32_t> outputInterfaces);
@end verbatim

A multicast route must specify an origin IP address, a multicast group and
an input network interface index as conditions and provide a vector of
output network interface indices over which packets matching the conditions
are sent.

Typically there are two main types of multicast routes:  routes of the 
first kind are used during forwarding.  All of the conditions must be
exlicitly provided.  The second kind of routes are used to get packets off
of a local node.  The difference is in the input interface.  Routes for
forwarding will always have an explicit input interface specified.  Routes
off of a node will always set the input interface to a wildcard specified
by the index Ipv4RoutingProtocol::IF\_INDEX\_ANY.

For routes off of a local node wildcards may be used in the origin and
multicast group addresses.  The wildcard used for Ipv4Adresses is that 
address returned by Ipv4Address::GetAny () -- typically "0.0.0.0".  Usage
of a wildcard allows one to specify default behavior to varying degrees.

For example, making the origin address a wildcard, but leaving the 
multicast group specific allows one (in the case of a node with multiple
interfaces) to create different routes using different output interfaces
for each multicast group.

If the origin and multicast addresses are made wildcards, you have created
essentially a default multicast address that can forward to multiple 
interfaces.  Compare this to the actual default multicast address that is
limited to specifying a single output interface for compatibility with
existing functionality in other systems.

Another command sets the default multicast route:
@verbatim
void 
Ipv4StaticRouting::SetDefaultMulticastRoute (uint32_t outputInterface);
@end verbatim

This is the multicast equivalent of the unicast version SetDefaultRoute.
We tell the routing system what to do in the case where a specific route
to a destination multicast group is not found.  The system forwards 
packets out the specified interface in the hope that "something out there"
knows better how to route the packet.  This method is only used in 
initially sending packets off of a host.  The default multicast route is
not consulted during forwarding -- exact routes must be specified using
AddMulticastRoute for that case.

Since we're basically sending packets to some entity we think may know
better what to do, we don't pay attention to "subtleties" like origin
address, nor do we worry about forwarding out multiple  interfaces.  If the
default multicast route is set, it is returned as the selected route from 
LookupStatic irrespective of origin or multicast group if another specific
route is not found.

Finally, a number of additional functions are provided to fetch and
remove multicast routes:
@verbatim
  uint32_t GetNMulticastRoutes (void) const;

  Ipv4MulticastRoute *GetMulticastRoute (uint32_t i) const;

  Ipv4MulticastRoute *GetDefaultMulticastRoute (void) const;

  bool RemoveMulticastRoute (Ipv4Address origin,
                             Ipv4Address group,
                             uint32_t inputInterface);

  void RemoveMulticastRoute (uint32_t index);
@end verbatim

@node Global centralized routing
@section Global centralized routing

Presently, global centralized IPv4 @emph{unicast} routing over both 
point-to-point and shared (CSMA) links is supported.
The global centralized routing will be modified in the future to
reduce computations once profiling finds the performance bottlenecks.

@node Global Unicast Routing API
@section Global Unicast Routing API

The public API is very minimal.  User scripts include the following:
@verbatim
#include "ns3/global-route-manager.h"
@end verbatim

After IP addresses are configured, the following function call will
cause all of the nodes that have an Ipv4 interface to receive
forwarding tables entered automatically by the GlobalRouteManager:
@verbatim
  GlobalRouteManager::PopulateRoutingTables ();
@end verbatim

@emph{Note:} A reminder that the wifi NetDevice is not yet supported
(only CSMA and PointToPoint).

It is possible to call this function again in the midst of a simulation
using the following additional public function:
@verbatim
  GlobalRouteManager::RecomputeRoutingTables ();
@end verbatim
which flushes the old tables, queries the nodes for new interface information,
and rebuilds the routes.

For instance, this scheduling call will cause the tables to be rebuilt
at time 5 seconds:
@verbatim
  Simulator::Schedule (Seconds (5),&GlobalRouteManager::RecomputeRoutingTables);
@end verbatim

@node Global Routing Implementation
@section Global Routing Implementation

A singleton object (GlobalRouteManager) is responsible for populating
the static routes on each node, using the public Ipv4 API of that node.
It queries each node in the topology for a "globalRouter" interface.
If found, it uses the API of that interface to obtain a "link state
advertisement (LSA)" for the router.  Link State Advertisements
are used in OSPF routing, and we follow their formatting.

The GlobalRouteManager populates a link state database with LSAs
gathered from the entire topology.  Then, for each router in the topology,
the GlobalRouteManager executes the OSPF shortest path first (SPF)
computation on the database, and populates the routing tables on each
node.

The quagga (http://www.quagga.net) OSPF implementation was used as the
basis for the routing computation logic.
One benefit of following an existing OSPF SPF implementation is that
OSPF already has defined link state advertisements for all common
types of network links:
@itemize @bullet
@item point-to-point (serial links)
@item point-to-multipoint (Frame Relay, ad hoc wireless)
@item non-broadcast multiple access (ATM)
@item broadcast (Ethernet)
@end itemize
Therefore, we think that enabling these other link types will be more
straightforward now that the underlying OSPF SPF framework is in place.

Presently, we can handle IPv4 point-to-point, numbered links, as well
as shared broadcast (CSMA) links, and we do not do equal-cost multipath.  

The GlobalRouteManager first walks the list of nodes and aggregates
a GlobalRouter interface to each one as follows:
@verbatim
  typedef std::vector < Ptr<Node> >::iterator Iterator;
  for (Iterator i = NodeList::Begin (); i != NodeList::End (); i++)
    {
      Ptr<Node> node = *i;
      Ptr<GlobalRouter> globalRouter = CreateObject<GlobalRouter> (node);
      node->AggregateObject (globalRouter);
    }
@end verbatim

This interface is later queried and used to generate a Link State
Advertisement for each router, and this link state database is
fed into the OSPF shortest path computation logic.  The Ipv4 API
is finally used to populate the routes themselves. 

@node Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR)
@section Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR)

This is the first dynamic routing protocol for @command{ns-3}.  The implementation
is found in the src/routing/olsr directory, and an example script is in
examples/simple-point-to-point-olsr.cc.

The following commands will enable OLSR in a simulation.  

@verbatim
  olsr::EnableAllNodes ();  // Start OLSR on all nodes
  olsr::EnableNodes(InputIterator begin, InputIterator end); // Start on
    // a list of nodes
  olsr::EnableNode (Ptr<Node> node);  // Start OLSR on "node" only
@end verbatim

Once instantiated, the agent can be started with the Start() command,
and the OLSR "main interface" can be set with the SetMainInterface()
command.  A number of protocol constants are defined in olsr-agent-impl.cc.

